Welcome back everyone.
In this lecture we're going to briefly discuss the idea behind two main issues and those are explored
ingredients and vanish ingredients as our networks grow deeper and more complex.
There's two issues that arise and again as I mentioned those are explored ingredients and varnish ingredients
and recall that the gradient is used in our calculation to adjust weights and biases in our network.
As we discussed in the back propagation theory lectures so let's think about just the basic feed forward
network in a feed for network.
Here we have the input layer over on the left hand side.
We feed it through some hidden layers and then we have our final output layer on the right.
Now for complex data we've already encountered complex data such as complex image data or we're gonna
do.
This section is work with complex sequence data.
We end up needing deeper network.
So we need more hidden layers in order to actually learn the patterns that are in our data.
Now what happens is there's this vanishing or exploding gradient issue that arises during the back propagation
step.
So recall that we're going to calculate some sort of lost metric on the output layer and then back propagate
our error all the way back to the input layer.
And if we're have lots of hidden layers then we're having the update to the weights and biases be a
function of many many other derivatives that we're calculating along the way back so back propagation
is going backwards from the output layer to the employer propagating that error gradient and for deeper
networks the issues can arise from back propagation.
And again those are vanishing and exploding gradients.
So as you go back to those lower layers close to the input layer the gradients are often actually getting
smaller.
So a vanishing gradient is usually the more common problem although they can technically explode on
the way back.
But as you're typically going back and back closer to those input layers there's gradients are getting
smaller and eventually what happens is they're so small by the time he gets the input layer that the
weights never really change that much at those lower input levels.
And that's actually a big problem because we want to be able to detect large basic patterns in our data
right up close to the input layer and have the deeper layers focus on smaller details or in smaller
patterns.
And again the opposite can also occur that the grants and the exploding on the way back causing these
issues so let's discuss why this is actually occurring and how we can fix it.
And then in the next lecture we'll discuss how these issues specifically affect the recurrent Neel networks
and how we can use the long short term memory unit and get a recurrent unit to also fix this to understand
why this is actually happening.
Let's take a look at a really common activation function such as the sigmoid activation function and
we also know that other activation functions such as logarithmic SOF Max actually use sigmoid as part
of their calculation.
So this is also relevant to that now as we know the sigmoid activation function basically squeezes any
input.
So here we can see the input on the x axis and it squeezes that input to fit between 0 and 1.
However let's take a closer look at what happens when your input starts to get further away from zero.
The further away your input is from zero.
The rate of change in the sigmoid function is actually decreasing rapidly and that rate of change that
is the derivative of the sigmoid function.
And we already know that back propagation and the gradient calculation is essentially just calculating
that derivative in multiple dimensions as you go back through into the hidden layers so let's actually
see the derivative on top of the sigmoid function and we can see here that the scale of that derivative
is much smaller than the actual sigmoid function.
And in fact here you can deviate not that much off the input of zero and eventually you're getting really
really small and close to a zero output so what ends up happening is when you're dealing with any number
of hidden layers you end up using an activation function like the sigmoid function which ends up resulting
in you have any number of small derivatives being multiplied together and by the time you're really
close to the input layer that gradient could decrease exponentially as we propagate down.
And that means you're actually not affecting the weights and biases that much of those first couple
of initial layers which are actually really important for finding the basic patterns in our data.
So we just mentioned that this is an issue of the activation function.
So an opportunity arises where we could just edit and change our activation function so we could use
different activation functions and we can use the rectified linear unit which doesn't actually saturate
those larger positive values we previously discussed that the rectified linear unit is a great choice
for activation and we use that quite a bit.
But here is one of its main benefits is that doesn't matter how large your input value is going to be
beyond zero.
You're not going to exponentially decrease the rate of change there and there's variations off the rectified
linear unit.
There's the leaky rectified linear unit that for negative input values instead of just flatten the amount
to zero.
It slowly leaks them into a very slow gradient going towards a negative number and then we also saw
the exponential linear unit which is called E L you for short.
And that basically kind of starts off a negative one for those larger negative values and then slowly
again continues and the gradient doesn't end up flattening out here which is again good for our calculations
as we won't get that vanishing gradient in other possible solution is to perform what's known as batch
normalization where your model will normalize each batch using that particular batches mean and standard
deviation and that has also been found to alleviate the issue of vanishing gradient.
There's also options of choosing different initialization the weights that can again also help alleviate
these vanishing gradient issues and a very popular method is called Xavier initialization so apart from
things like nationalization we also mentioned that there's sometimes the issue of exploding gradients
where essentially if you're putting on what activation function using you may actually have really a
large gradient values being multiplied by larger values and larger values and you end up just getting
no convergence as you go closer to the input layers.
So we could do is just use what's known as gradient clipping which is kind of a dirty trick.
It's kind of a very quick fix but essentially what you just decide is gradients are gonna be cut off
before reaching some predetermined limit.
And for example you're going to cut off gradients to be always between negative one and one so you're
not going to let them get too small or get too large.
So the recurrent neural network for a time series present their own gradient challenges.
So we're going to do is we're going to explore these special long short term memory neuron unit that
helps actually alleviate a lot of these issues as well.
And it's really good for dealing with sequence data.
So the next lecture let's go to discuss this very special neuron that's very popular for a current year
on networks which is the long short term memory or else time neuron unit.
I'll see you there.